good evening from belmont university in
nashville tennessee
i'm kristen welker of nbc news and i
welcome you to the final 2020
presidential debate
between president donald j trump and
former vice president joe biden
tonight's debate is sponsored by the
commission on presidential debates
it is conducted under health and safety
protocols designed by the commission's health
security adviser
the audience here in the hall has
promised to remain silent
no cheers boos or other interruptions
except right now as we welcome to the stage
former vice president joe biden
and president donald j trump
how you doing how're you and i do want to say a very good evening
to both of you
this debate will cover six major topics
at the beginning of each section each
candidate will have two minutes
uninterrupted to answer my first question the debate
commission will then turn
on their microphone only when it is
their turn to answer
and the commission will turn it off
exactly when the two minutes have
expired after that both microphones will remain
on but on behalf of the voters i'm going
to ask you to please speak one at a time
the goal is for you to hear each other
and for the american people to hear
every word of what you both have to say
and so with that if you're ready let's
start and we will begin with the fight against
the coronavirus president trump the
first question is for you
the country is heading into a dangerous
new phase more than 40,000
americans are in the hospital tonight
with covid
including record numbers here in
tennessee and since the two of you last
shared a stage 16,000 americans have
died from covid
so please be specific how would you lead
the country during this
next stage of the coronavirus crisis two
minutes uninterrupted
so as you know 2.2 million people
modeled out were expected to die we
closed up
the greatest economy in the world in
order to fight
this horrible disease that came from
china it's a worldwide pandemic it's all
over the world you see the spikes in
europe and
many other places right now if you
notice the
mortality rate is down 85%
the excess mortality rate is way down
and much lower than almost any other
country and we're fighting it and we're fighting
it hard there is a spike there was a
spike in florida and
it's now gone there was a very big spike
in texas
in arizona it's now gone
and there are some spikes and surges and
other places they will soon be gone
we have a vaccine that's coming it's
ready it's
going to be announced within weeks and
it's going to be delivered we have
operation warp speed which is the
military is going to distribute the
vaccine i can tell you from personal experience
i was in the hospital i had it and i got
better and i will tell you that
i had something that they gave me a
therapeutic i guess they would call it some people
could say it was a cure
but i was in for a short period of time
and i got better very fast or i wouldn't
be here tonight
and now they say i'm immune whether it's
four months or a lifetime nobody's been
able to say that but
i'm immune more and more people are
getting better we have a problem that's
a worldwide problem this is a
worldwide problem but i've been
congratulated by the heads of many
countries on what we've been able to do with the
if you if you take a look at what we've
done in terms of
goggles and masks and gowns and
everything else
and in particular ventilators we're now
making ventilators
all over the world thousands and
thousands a month distributing them all
over the world
it will go away and as i say we're
rounding the turn we're rounding the
corner it's going away
okay former vice president biden to you
how would you lead the country
out of this crisis you have two minutes
uninterrupted 220,000 americans dead
you hear nothing else i say tonight
hear this
anyone who is responsible for not taking
control in fact not saying i'm i take no
responsibility initially
anyone who's responsible for that many
deaths should not remain as president of
the united states of america
we're in a situation where there are a
thousand deaths
a day now a thousand deaths a day and
there are over
70,000 new cases per day
compared to what's going on in europe
as the new england medical journal said
they're starting from a very
low rate we're starting from a very high
rate the expectation is we'll have another
200,000 americans dead the time between now
and the end of the year
if we just wore these masks the
president's own advisers have told him
we could save a hundred thousand lives
and we're in a circumstance where the
president thus far and still has
no plan no comprehensive plan
what i would do is make sure we have
everyone encouraged to wear a mask
all the time i would make sure we move
in the direction of rapid testing
investing in
rapid testing i would make sure that we
set up national standards as to how to
open up
schools and open up businesses so they
can be safe and give them the
wherewithal the financial resources to
be able to do that
we're in a situation now where the new
england medical journal one of the
serious most serious journals in the
in the whole world said for the first
time ever that this the way this
president has responded to this crisis
has been absolutely tragic and so folks
i will take care of this i will end this
i will make sure we have a plan
president trump i'd like to
follow up with you and your comments you
talked about taking a therapeutic i
assume you're referencing
regeneron you also said a vaccine will
be coming within weeks
yes is that a guarantee no it's not a
guarantee but it will be by the end
of the year but i think it has a good
chance there are two companies i think
within a matter of weeks
and it will be distributed very quickly
can you tell us which companies
johnson johnson is doing very well
moderna is doing very well
pfizer is doing very well and we have
numerous others
then we also have others that we're
working on very closely with other
countries in particular europe
let me follow up with you and because this
is new information you have said a
vaccine is coming soon within weeks now
your own officials say
it could take well into 2021 at the
earliest for enough americans to get
vaccinated and even then they say the country will
be wearing masks and distancing
into 2022 is your timeline realistic no
i think my timeline is going to be more
accurate i don't know that they're
counting on the military the way i do
but we have our generals lined up one in
particular that's the
head of logistics and this is a very
easy distribution for him he's ready to
go as soon as we have the vaccine
and we expect to have a hundred million
vials as soon as we have the vaccine
he's ready to go
vice president biden your reaction and
just 40 percent of americans say they
would definitely agree to take a
coronavirus vaccine
if it was approved by the government
what steps would you take to give
americans confidence
in a vaccine if it were approved make
sure it's totally
transparent have the scientists of the
world see it
know it look at it go through all the
processes and by the way
he's this is the same fellow told you
this is going to end by easter last time
this is the same fellow
who told you that don't worry we're
going to end this by the summer we're
about to go into a dark winter
a dark winter and he has no clear plan
and there's no prospect
that there's going to be a vaccine
available for the majority of the
american people before the middle of
next year
president trump your reaction he says
you have no plan i don't think we're going to have a dark winter
at all we're opening up our country
we've learned and studied and understand
the disease
which we didn't at the beginning when i
closed and banned
china from coming in heavily infected
and then ultimately europe
but china was in january months later he
was saying i was xenophobic i did it too
soon now he's saying oh
i should have uh i should have you know
moved quicker but he didn't move quicker
he was months behind me
many months behind me and frankly he ran
the
h1n1 swine flu and it was a total disaster
far less lethal but it was a total disaster
had that had this kind of numbers
700,000 people would be dead right now
but it was a far less lethal disease
look his own person who ran that for him
who as you know was his chief of staff
said it was catastrophic it was horrible
we didn't know what we were doing now he
comes up and he tells us how to do this
also everything that he said about the
way every single move that he said we
should make
that's what we've done we've done all of
it but he was way behind
us vice president biden your response my
response is he is xenophobic but not
because he shutdown
access from china and he did it late
after 40 countries had already done that
in addition to that what he did he made
sure that we had 44 people that were in
there in china trying to get to wuhan to
determine what exactly the source
was what did the president say in
january he said no he said this is
he's being transparent the president of
china is being transparent we owe him a
debt of gratitude we oughtta we have to
thank him
and and then what happened was we
started talking about using the defense
act to make sure we go out and get whatever
is needed out there to protect people
and again i go back to this he had
nothing he did
virtually nothing and then he gets out
of the hospital
and he talks about we're this is
don't worry
it's all going to be over soon come on
there's not another serious scientist in
the world who thinks it's going to be
over soon president trump your reaction
i didn't say over soon i say we're learning to live
with it we have no choice we can't lock
ourselves up in a basement like
joe does he has the he has the ability
to lock himself up i don't know he's
obviously made a lot of money someplace
but he has this thing about living in a
basement people can't do that
by the way i as the president couldn't
do that i'd love to put myself in the
basement or in a beautiful room in the
white house
and go away for a year and a half until
it disappears i can't do that
and kirsten every every meeting i had
every meeting i had and i'd meet a lot
of families including gold star families
and military families
every meeting i had and i had to meet
them i had to it would be horrible to
have canceled everything
i said you know this is dangerous and
you catch it and you know i caught it i
learned a lot
i learned a lot great doctors great
hospitals and now i recovered 99.9
of young people recover 99%
of people recover we have to recover we
can't close up our nation we have to
open our school
and we can't close up our nation or
you're not going to have a nation
and of course the cdc has said young
people can get sick with covid-19 and
can pass it
vice president biden i want to talk
broadly about strategy
though can i respond to that 30
seconds please then i have a question
number one he says that we're uh you know we're
learning to live with it
people are learning to die with it you
folks home will have an empty chair at
the kitchen table this morning
that man or wife going to bed tonight
and reaching over to try to touch their
out of habit where their wife or husband
was is gone
learning to live with it come on we're
dying with it
because he's never said you see you said it's
dangerous when's the last time is it
really dangerous still
are we dangerous you tell the people
it's dangerous now what should they do
about the danger
and you say i take no responsibility let
me talk about your excuse me i take full
i take full responsibility it's not my
fault that it came here it's china's
fault and you know what it's not joe's
fault that it came here either
it's china's fault they kept it from
going into the rest of china for the
most part
but they didn't keep it from coming out
to the world including europe and
ourselves vice president biden the fact is that
when we knew it was coming
when it hit what happened what did the
president say
he said don't worry it's gonna go
away be gone by easter don't worry the
warm weather don't worry maybe inject
bleach he said he was kidding when he
said that but a lot of people thought it was
serious a whole range of things the
president has said
even today he thinks we are in control
we're about to lose two hundred thousand more people
president trump look perhaps just to
finish this
i was kidding on that but just to finish
this when i closed he said i shouldn't have
closed and that went on for months nancy pelosi
said the same thing she was dancing on
the streets in chinatown in san
francisco but when i closed he said this is a
terrible thing you xenophobic i think he
called me racist even
and because i was closing it to china
now he says i should have closed it
earlier joe it doesn't work i didn't say
either of those things you certainly
did you certainly did i talked about his xenophobia in a
different context it wasn't about
closing the border to chinese coming to
the united states all right i want to
talk about both of your different
strategies to handling this he thought i
shouldn't have closed the border well
let's that's obvious is that do you want to
respond to that quickly vice president
biden no okay let's talk about your different
strategies toward dealing with this mr
vice president you suggested you would
support new shutdowns if scientists
recommended it
what do you say to americans who are
fearful that the cost of shutdowns the
impact on the economy
the higher rates of hunger depression
domestic and substance abuse
outweighs the risk of exposure to the
virus what i would say
is i'm going to shut down the virus not
the country it's his ineptitude that
caused the vir that
caused the country to have to shut down
in large part why businesses have gone
under why schools are closed why so many
people have lost their
living and why they're concerned those
other concerns are real that's why
he should have been instead of in a sand
trap at his golf course he should have
been negotiating
with nancy pelosi and the rest of the
democrats and republicans about
what to do about the acts they were
passing for billions of dollars to make
sure people had the capacity
but you haven't ruled out more shutdowns
well no i'm not shutting down today but
there are
look they need standards the standard is
if you have a reproduction rate in a
community that's above a certain level everybody
says slow up
more social distancing do not open bars
and do not open gymnasiums
do not open until you get this under
control under more control
but when you do open give the people the
capacity to be able to open and have the
capacity to do it safely for example schools
schools they need a lot of money to open
they need to
deal with ventilation systems they need
to deal with smaller classes
more teachers more pods and he's refused
to support that money
or at least up to now let's talk about
schools president trump i think we have
to respond if i might
please and then i have a follow-up thank
you and i appreciate that look all he
does is talk about shutdowns but forget
about him
his democrat governors cuomo in new york
you look at what's going on in
california you look at pennsylvania
north carolina democrats democrats all
they're shut down so tight and they're
dying they're dying and he supports all these
people all he talks about is shutdowns no we're
not going to shut down
and we have to open our schools and it's
like as an example
i have a young son he also tested
positive by the time i spoke to the doctor the
second time he was fine it just went
away young people i guess it's their immune
system let me follow up with you
president trump you've demanded
schools open in person and insist they
can do it safely but just yesterday
boston became the latest city to move
its public school system entirely online
after a coronavirus spike what is your
message to parents who worry
that sending their children to school
will endanger not only their kids but
also their teachers and families
i want to open the schools the
transmittal rate to the teachers is
very small but i want to open the
schools we have to open our country
we're not going to have a country
you can't do this we can't keep this
country closed this is a massive
country with a massive economy people
are losing their jobs
they're committing suicide there's
depression alcohol drugs
at a level that nobody's ever seen
before there's
abuse tremendous abuse we have to open
our country
you know i've said it often the cure
cannot be worse
than the problem itself and that's
what's happening
and he wants to close down he'll close
down the country if
one person in our in our massive
bureaucracy says we should close it down
vice president biden your response simply not
true we ought to be able to walk and chew gum
at the same time we ought to be able to
safely open
but they need resources to open
you need to be able to for example if
you're going to open a business
have social distancing within the
business you need to have if you have a
restaurant you need to have
plexiglas dividers so people cannot
infect one another you need to be in a
position where you can take
testing rapidly and know whether
person is
in fact infected you need to be able to
trace you need to be able to provide
all the resources that are needed to do
this and that is not
inconsistent with saying that
what we're going to make sure that we
open safely and by the way
all you teachers out there not that many
of you are going to die so don't worry
about it
so don't worry about it come on
president trump let me follow up with
you quickly
by the way i will say this if you go and look at
what's happened to new york
it's a ghost town it's a ghost town and
when you talk about plexiglas these are
restaurants that are dying
these are businesses with no money
putting up plexiglas is unbelievably
expensive and it's not the answer i mean you're
going to sit there in a cubicle wrapped
around with
plastic it's these are businesses that
are dying joe you can't do that to
people you just can't take a look at new york
and what's happened to my
wonderful city for for so many years i
loved it it was vibrant it's dying
everyone's leaving new york
take a look at what new york has
done in terms of turning the curve down
in terms of the number of people dying
and i don't look at this in terms of the
way he does blue states and red
states they're all the united states and
look at the states that are having such
a spike
in the coronavirus they're the red
states they're the states in the midwest they're the
states in the upper midwest that's where
the spike is occurring significantly
but they're all americans they're all
americans and what we have to do is say
wear these masks number one make sure we
get the help that the businesses need
that has
money's already been passed to do that
it's been out there
since the beginning of the summer and
nothing's happened
kristen new york has lost more than forty
thousand people eleven thousand people in nursing
homes president trump what about when you say spike take
a look at what's happening
in pennsylvania where they've had it
closed take a look at what's happening
with your friend
in michigan where her husband's the only
one allowed to do anything
it's been like a prison now it was just
ruled unconstitutional
take a look at north carolina they're
having spikes
and they've been closed and they're
getting killed financially
we can't let that happen joe you can't
let that happen
we have to open up and we understand the
disease we have to protect our seniors we have
to protect our elderly
we have to protect especially our
seniors with heart problems and
diabetes problems and we will protect we
have the best testing in the world by
far that's why we have so many cases let me
follow up with you before we move on to
our next section president trump this
week you called dr anthony fauci the
nation's best known infectious disease
expert a disaster you described him and
other medical experts as
idiots if you're not listening to them
who are you listening to
i'm listening to all of them including
anthony i get along very well with
anthony but
he did say don't wear masks he did say
as you know this is not going to be a
problem i think he's a democrat but that's okay
he said this is not going to be a
problem we are not going to have a problem at
all when joe says that
i said anthony fauci said and others and
many others and i'm not
knocking him a lot nobody knew look
nobody knew what this thing was nobody
knew where it was coming from what it
was we've learned a lot but anthony said
don't wear masks now he wants to wear
masks anthony also said if you look back exact
words here's his exact words
this is no problem this is going to go
away soon so he's allowed to make
mistakes he happens to be a good person vice
president biden your response quickly
and then we're going to move on to the
next section my response is that
think about what the president knew in
january and didn't tell the american
people he was told this was a serious virus
that spread in the air
and it was much worse than much worse
than the flu
he went on record and said to one of
your colleagues
recorded that in fact he knew how
dangerous it was but he didn't want to
tell us
he didn't want to tell us because he
didn't want us to panic he didn't want
us americans don't panic he panicked but
guess what in the meantime we find out
in the new york times the other day that
in fact
his folks went to wall street and said
this is a really dangerous thing
and a memo out of that meeting not from
his administration
but from some of the brokers said sell
short because we've got to get moving
it's a dangerous problem well this is
one i i'm going to give you 30 seconds to
respond and then we're gonna move on the wall
street one i don't know somebody went through wall
street you're the one that takes all the
money from wall street i don't take it
i haven't joe you have raised a lot of money
tremendous amounts of money
and every time you raise money deals are
made joe i could raise so much more
money as president and as somebody that knows
most of those people
i could call the heads of wall street
the heads of every company in america
i would blow away every record but i
don't want to do that because it puts me
in a bad position
and then you bring up wall street you
shouldn't be bringing up wall street
because you're the one that takes the
money from wall street not me
i could blow away your records that like
you wouldn't believe we don't need money
we have plenty of money in fact
we beat hillary clinton with a tiny
fraction of the money that she was able to raise
all right gentlemen
we're going to move on but don't tell me about wall street joe average
contribution $43 all right we're going
to move on to our next section which is
national security and i do want to start
with the security of our elections and
some breaking news from overnight just
last night
top intelligence officials confirmed
again that both russia and iran
are working to influence this election
both countries have obtained u.s voter
registration information these officials
say and iran sent intimidating messages to
florida voters this question goes to you mr vice
president what would you do
to put an end to this threat you have
two minutes uninterrupted
i made it clear and i asked everyone
else to take the pledge
i made it clear that any country no
matter who it is that interferes in
american elections
will pay a price they will pay a price
and it's been overwhelmingly clear this
election i won't even get into the last
one this election that russia has been
involved china's been involved to some
degree and now we learn that
that that iran is involved they will
pay a price if i'm elected they're
interfering with american
sovereignty that's what's going on right
now they're interfering with american
sovereignty and to the best of my knowledge i don't
think the president has said anything to
putin about it
i don't think he's talking to him a lot i
don't think he's said a word i don't know
why he hadn't said a word to putin about
it and i don't know what he has recently
said if anything to the iranians my
guess is he'd probably be more outspoken
with regard to the iranians
but the point is this folks we are in a
situation where we have foreign company
countries trying to interfere in the
outcome of our election his own
own national security adviser told him
that what is happening with his
buddy well i shouldn't well i will his
buddy rudy giuliani he's being used as a
russian pawn
he's being fed information that is
russian that is not true and then what happens
nothing happens
and then you find out that everything that's
going on here
about russia is wanting to make sure
that i do not
get elected the next president of the united
states because they know
i know them and they know me
i don't understand why this president is
unwilling to take on putin
when he's actually paying bounties to
kill american soldiers in afghanistan
when he's engaged in activities that are
trying to destabilize all of
nato i don't know why he doesn't do it
but it's worth
asking the question why isn't that being
done any country that interferes with us will
in fact
pay a price because they're affecting
our sovereignty
president trump same question to you have
to respond let me ask the question you're going to
have two minutes to respond for two
elections in a row now there has been
substantial interference from foreign
adversaries what would you do in your next term to
put an end to this two minutes
uninterrupted well let me respond to the first part as joe
answered joe got three and a half
million dollars from russia
and it came through putin because he was
very friendly with the
former mayor of moscow and it was the
mayor of moscow's wife
and you got three and a half million
dollars your family got three and a half
million dollars and
you know someday you're gonna have to
explain why did you get three and a half i
never got any money from russia i don't
get money from russia
now about your thing last night i knew
all about that
and through john who is john ratcliffe
who is fantastic dni
he said the one thing that's common to
both of them
they both want you to lose because there
has been nobody tougher to russia
with between the sanctions nobody
tougher than me on russia
between the sanctions between all of
what i've done with nato you know i've
got the nato countries to put up
an extra $130 billion going to $420
billion a year
that's to guard against russia i sold
while he was selling pillows and sheets
i sold tank busters to ukraine there has
been nobody
tougher on russia than donald
trump and i'll tell you they were so bad they
took over the
the submarine port you remember that
very well
during your term during you and barack
obama they took over a big part of what should
have been ukraine you handed it to them
but you were getting a lot of money from
russia they were paying you
a lot of money and they probably still
are but now with what came out today
it's even worse all of the emails the
emails the horrible emails of the kind
of money that you were raking in you and
your family
and joe you were vice president when
some of this was happening
and it should have never happened and i
think you owe
an explanation to the american people
why is it somebody just had a news
conference a little while
ago who was essentially supposed to work
with you and your family
but what he said was damning and
regardless of me
i think you have to clean it up and talk
to the american people maybe you can do
it right now
vice president biden you may respond
let me be straight here and then i do want to follow up on
the election security i have not
taken a penny from any foreign source
ever in my life
we learned that this president paid 50
times the tax
in china has a secret bank account with
china does business in china and in fact
is talking about me taking money i have
not taken a single penny from
any country whatsoever ever number one
number two this is a president i have
released all of my tax returns 22 years go look
at them
22 years of my tax return you have not
released a single solitary year of
your tax return
what are you hiding why are you
unwilling the foreign countries are
paying you
a lot russia's paying you a lot china's
paying you a lot
on your hotels and all your businesses
all around the country
all around the world and china's
building a new road to a new
golf course you have overseas so
what's going on here why don't release
your tax return or stop talking about
corruption president trump your response
first of all
i called my accountants underwrote it
i'm going to release them as soon as we
can i want to do it and it'll show how
successful how great this company is but
much more importantly than that
people were saying $750 i asked them
a week ago i said what did i pay they
said sir you prepaid
tens of millions of dollars i prepaid my
tax tens over the last number of years
tens of millions of dollars i prepaid
because at some point they think it's an
estimate they think i may have to pay
tax so i already prepaid it nobody told me
that nobody told you that did your accountant tell you
when you can release them excuse me and it wasn't written whenever
they write this they keep talking about
$750 which i think is a filing fee but let me
just tell you i prepaid
millions and millions of dollars in
taxes number one number two i don't make money
from china you do
i don't make money from ukraine you do i
don't make money from russia
you made three and a half million
dollars joe and your son gave you
they even have a statement that we have
to give 10%
to the big man you're the big man i
think i don't know maybe you're not
but you're the big man i think your son
said we have to give 10%
to the big man joe what's that all about
it's terrible
all right gentlemen i want to ask you
both some questions i have to respond to that about all of this
but i'm going to let you both respond very
quickly you just said you spoke to your
accountant about potentially releasing
your taxes did he tell you when you can
release them do you
have a as soon as the auditors finish deadline for when you're going to release them to the american people i get treated worse than the tea party got treated
but you don't have a timeline because i have a lot of people in there
deep down in the irs they treat me
horribly we made a deal it was all
settled until i decide to run for president i
get treated very badly by the irs very
unfairly but we had a deal all done as soon as
we're completed with the deal i want to
release it
but i have paid millions and millions of
dollars and i it's worse than paying i paid in
advance it's called prepaying your
taxes i paid in advance
i want to ask you both about questions
regarding your potential foreign
entanglements and questions that have
been raised to give you both a chance to
talk about this more broadly
respond very quickly and then i'll get
to my question why
did he's been saying this for four years
show us
just show us stop playing around you've
been saying for four years everybody knows you're going
to release your taxes
nobody knows mr president what they do
know is you're not
paying your taxes or you're paying taxes
that are
so low when last time he said what he
paid he said i only pay that little
because i'm smart
i know how to game the system come on
come on folks
so president trump and then i want to
get to two questions to both of you
on this sure i was put through a phony witch
hunt for three years it started
before i even got elected they spied on
my campaign
no president should ever have to go
through what i went through let me just
say this mueller and 18 angry democrats
and fbi agents all over the place spent
$48 million
they went through everything i had
including my tax returns
and they found absolutely no collusion
and nothing wrong
forty-eight million i guarantee you if i spent one
million on you joe i could find plenty
wrong all right because the kind of things that you've
done and the kind of monies that your
family has taken
i mean your brother made money in iraq
let me millions of dollars
your other brother made a fortune and
it's all through you joe and they say
you get some of it
and you do live very well you have
houses all over the place you live very
well all right gentlemen let me just ask some
questions about all of this broadly vice
president biden there have been
questions about the work your son has
done in china and
for a ukrainian energy company when you
were vice president in retrospect
was anything about those relationships
inappropriate or unethical
nothing was unethical here's what the
deal with regard to ukraine we had this whole
question about whether or not because he
was on the board i later learned of burisma
a company that somehow i had done
something wrong
yet every single solitary person when he
was going through his impeachment
testifying under oath who work for him
said i did my
job impeccably i carried out u.s
policy not one single solitary thing was
out of line
not a single thing number one number two
the guy who got in trouble in ukraine
was this guy trying to bribe
the ukrainian government to say
something negative about me
which they would not do and did not do
because it never
ever ever happened my son has not made
money in terms of this thing about uh
what are you talking about
china i have not had the only guy who
made money from china
is this guy he's the only one nobody
else has made money from china
president trump never did a deal with china by the way let me ask my
question to you
but could i just one one thing very quickly
his son didn't have a job for a long time
was sadly no longer in the military
service i won't get into that
and he didn't have a job as soon as he
became vice president
burisma not the best not the best
reputation in the world
i hear they paid him a $183,000
a month listen to this a hundred and eighty-three and they gave
him a three million dollar upfront
payment all right
and he had no energy experience that's 100% dishonest i'm going to let
the vice president respond to that
quickly and then i need to get to a
question to you very
quickly no basis for that everybody investigated
that no one said anything he did was
wrong in ukraine
okay president trump this is for you
since you took office you've never
divested from your business you've
personally promoted your properties
abroad a report this week which was
referenced does indicate that your
company has a bank account in china
so how can voters know that you don't
have any foreign conflicts of interest i
have many bank accounts and they're all
listed and they're all over the place i mean i
was a businessman doing business
the bank account you're referring to
which is everybody knows about it it's
listed the bank account was in 2013
that's what it was it was opened in it
was closed in 2015 i believe
and then i decided because i was going
to do i was thinking about doing a deal
in china like
millions of other people i was thinking
about it and i decided i'm not going to
do it
didn't like it i decided not to do it
had an account open
and i closed it okay excuse me and then
unlike him
where he's vice president and he does
business i then decided to run for president
after that that was before
so i closed it before i even ran for
president let alone became president big
difference he is
the vice president of the united states
and his son his brother
and his other brother are getting rich
they're like a vacuum cleaner they're
sucking up money every place he goes okay president trump thank you we do need to move on not true i
do want to ask you
vice president biden about china let's
talk about china more broadly
there have of course president trump has
said that they should pay
for not being fully transparent in
regards to the coronavirus
if you were president would you make
china pay and please be specific what
would that look like
what i'd make china do is play by the
international rules
not like he has done he has caused the
deficit with china to go up not down
with china up not down we are making
sure that in order to do business in
china you have to give
all your intellectual property you have
to get a have a partner in china it's 51%
we would not do that at all number one
number two we're in a situation where
china would have to play by the rules
internationally as well
when i met with xi that and when i was
still vice president he said we're
setting up air identification zones in
the in the south china sea you can't fly
through them i said we're going to fly
through them we just flew b-52 b-1
bombers through it we're not going to pay
attention they have to play by the rules
and what's he do he embraces guys like
the thugs like in north korea and
and and the chinese president and putin
and others
and he pokes his finger in the eye of
all of our friends all of our allies
we make up only we're 25%
25% of the world's economy we need to be
having the rest of our friends
with us saying to china these are the
rules you play by them or you're going
to pay the price for not paying by them
economically that's the way i will run
it and that's what we did
and upholding steel tariffs and a range
of other things when we were president
and vice president
all right let's talk about north korea
no no no excuse me no i have to respond to
that okay very quickly and then we're going
to move on to north korea his son walked out with a billion and a half
dollars from china
to manage not true after spending 10 minutes in office and
being in air force two
number one number two there's a very
strong email talking about your family wanting
to make
ten million dollars a year for
introductions president trump on china
policy that's not true though what specifically no
no but wait a minute what specifically are you gonna do what specifically
are you going to do to make china pay
you've said you're going to
make them pay first of all china is paying they're paying
billions and billions of dollars i just
gave 28 billion
dollars new sanctions i just gave 28 billion
dollars to our farmers
taxpayer's money because china it's what taxpayer's money
didn't come from china no no yeah you know who the taxpayer is
it's called china
not true china paid 28 billion and you know what
they did to pay it joe
they devalued their currency and they
also paid up and you know who got the
money our farmers our great farmers
because they were targeted
you never charged them anything also i
charged them 25% on dumped steel
because they were killing our steel
indust we were not going to have a steel
industry okay
and now we have a steel industry okay vice
president biden your response please
my response is look this isn't about
there's a reason why he's
bringing up all this malarkey there's a
reason for it
he doesn't want to talk about these the
substantive issues
it's not about his family and my family
it's about your family
and your family's hurting badly if
you're making less than
if you're a middle-class family you're
getting hurt
badly right now you're sitting at the
kitchen table this morning deciding
well we can't get new tires they're bald
because we have to wait another month or
so or are we going to be able to pay the
mortgage or who's going to tell her
she can't go back to to community
college they're the decisions you're making in
the middle-class families like i grew up
in scranton and claymont
they're in trouble we should be talking
about your families but that's the last
thing he wants to talk about
that is a typical statement i want to talk about north
korea excuse me just for one second please 10 seconds mr president 10 seconds
that's a typical political statement
let's get off this china thing and then
he looks the family around the table
everything just a typical politician when i see
that let's talk about north korea now i'm not a typical
politician okay
president trump that's why i got elected let's get off
the subject of china let's talk around
sitting around the table
come on joe you could do better we're
going to talk about north korea now
president trump you've met with north
korean leader kim jong-un three times
you've talked about your beautiful
letters with him you've touted the fact
that there hasn't been a war
or a long-range missile test and yet
north korea recently rolled out its
biggest ever intercontinental ballistic
missile and continues to develop its nuclear
arsenal do you see
that as a betrayal of the relationship
you forged no just 30 seconds here because
we need to get on to the next topic so
when i met with barack obama we sat in
the white house
right at the beginning had a great
conversation was supposed to be 15
minutes and it was well over an hour
he said the biggest problem we have with
north is north korea
he indicated we will be in a war with
north korea guess what
it would be a nuclear war and he does
have plenty of nuclear capability
in the meantime i have a very good
relationship with him different kind of
a guy but he probably thinks the same
thing about me
we have a different kind of a
relationship we have a very good
relationship and there's no war and you know about
two months ago
he broke into a certain area they said
oh there's going to be trouble i said
no they're not
because he's not going to do that and i
was right look instead of being in a war
where millions of people seoul you know
is 25 miles away
millions and millions 32 million people
in seoul millions of people would be
dead right now we don't have a war and i have a good relationship president trump that's 30
seconds thank you vice president biden to you north korea
conducted four nuclear tests under the
obama administration
why do you think you would be able to
rein in this persistent threatening
because i'd make it clear which we were
making clear to china they had to be
part of the deal because here's the real
i made it clear and as a spokesperson
for the administration when i went to china
that they said why are you moving your
missile defense up so close
why are you moving more forces here why
you continue to do
military maneuvers with south korea i
said because
north korea is a problem and we're going
to continue to do it so we can control
them we're going to make sure we can control
them and make sure they cannot hurt us
and so if you want to do something about
it step up and help if not
it's going to continue what has he done
he's legitimized north korea
he's talked about his good buddy who's a
thug a thug
and he talks about how we're better off
and they are have much more capable
missiles able to reach u.s territory much more
easily than ever did before let me
follow up with you
vice president biden you've said you
wouldn't meet with kim jong-un without
preconditions are there any conditions
under which you would meet with him
on the condition that he would agree
that he would be drawing down his
nuclear capacity to get that the korean
peninsula should be nuclear free zone
all right let's move on to american
families kristen they tried to meet with him very quickly
10 seconds president trump they tried to meet with him he wouldn't
do it he didn't like
obama he didn't like him he wouldn't do
it i know for a fact they tried okay i gotta give him a chance to
respond to that
he wouldn't do it before we move on and that's okay you know what north
korea we're not in a war
we have a good relationship you know
people don't understand having a good
relationship with leaders of other countries president trump we have to move on is a good thing because we have
a lot of questions to get to
yes not a bad thing your response understand we had a good relationship with
hitler before he in fact
invaded europe the rest of europe come
on the reason he would not meet with
president obama is because president
obama said
we're going to talk about
denuclearization we're not going to
legitimize you and we're going to continue
to push stronger and stronger
sanctions on you that's why he wouldn't
meet with us
all right let's move on and it didn't happen let's
move on and talk about american families excuse me he left me a
mess kristen president trump okay they left me
a mess
north korea was a mess and in fact if
you remember the first two or three
months
there was a very dangerous period in my
first three months before we sort of
worked things out a little bit okay
there was a very
day they left us a mess and obama would be
i think the first to say it was the
single biggest problem he thought
that our country had okay let's move on to
american families and the economy
one of the issues that's most important
to them is health care as you both know
today there was a key vote on a new
supreme court justice amy coney barrett
and health care is at the center of her
confirmation fight
over 20 million americans get their
health insurance through the affordable
care act
it's headed to the supreme court and
your administration mr president is
advocating for the court to overturn it
if the supreme court does overturn that
law those 20 million americans could
lose their health insurance almost
overnight so what would you do
if those people have their health
insurance taken away you have two
minutes uninterrupted
first of all i've already done something
that nobody thought was possible
through the legislature i terminated the
individual mandate that is the worst part of
obamacare as we call it the individual mandate
where you have to pay a fortune for the
privilege of
not having to pay for bad health
insurance i terminated it's gone
now it's in court because obamacare is
no good
but then i made a decision run it as
well as you can
to my people great people run it as well
as you can i could have gone the other
route and made everybody very unhappy they ran
it premiums are down everything's down
here's the problem no matter how well
you run it it's no good
what we'd like to do is terminate it we
have the individual mandate
done i don't know that it's going to
work if we don't win
we will have to run it and we'll have
obamacare but it'll be better run
but it no longer is obamacare because
without the individual mandate
it's much different pre-existing
conditions will always stay
what i would like to do is a much better
health care much better we'll always
protect people with pre-existing
so i'd like to terminate obamacare come
up with a brand new beautiful health
care the democrats will do it because
there'll be tremendous pressure on them
and we might even have the house by that
time and i think we're going to win the house
okay you'll see but i think we're going
to win the house
but come up with a better health care
always protecting people
with pre-existing conditions and one
thing very important we have 180 million
people out there
that have great private health care far
more than we're talking about with
obamacare joe biden is going to terminate all of
those policies these are people that
love their health care people that have
been successful middle-income people
been successful they have 180
million plans 180 million people
families under what he wants to do which will
basically be socialized medicine he
won't even have a choice
they want to terminate 180 million plans
we have done an incredible job on
health care
and we're going to do even better okay
vice president biden yes this is for you
your health care plan calls for building
on obamacare so my question is what is
your plan
if the law is ruled unconstitutional by
the supreme court you have two minutes
uninterrupted what i'm going to do is pass obamacare
with a public option
become bidencare the public option is
an option that says that
if you in fact do not have the
wherewithal to be if you qualify
for medicaid and you do not have the
wherewithal in your state to get medicaid you
automatically are enrolled
providing competition for insurance
companies that's what's going to happen
secondly we're going to make sure we reduce the
premiums and reduce drug prices
by making sure that there's competition
that doesn't exist now by allowing
medicare to negotiate drug prices
with the insurance companies thirdly
the idea that i want to eliminate
private insurance the reason why i had
such a fight
for with 20 candidates for the
nomination was
i support private insurance that's why i
not one single person with private
insurance would lose their insurance
under my plan
nor did they under obamacare they did
not lose their insurance
unless they chose they wanted to go to
something else lastly
we're going to make sure we're in a situation
that we actually
protect pre-existing there's no way he
can protect pre-existing conditions
none zero you can't do it in the ether
he's been talking about this for a long
time there is no he's never come up with
a plan i guess we're going to get
the pre-existing condition plan the same
time we get the infrastructure plan
that we've been waiting since 17 18 19
and 20
the fact i still have a few more minutes
i know you're getting anxious
the uh the fact is that
he's already cost the american people
because of his terrible handling of the
covid virus and economic spillover
10 million people have lost their
private insurance
and he wants to take away 22 million
more people who have it under obamacare
and over 110 million people with
pre-existing conditions
and all the people from covid are going
to have pre-existing conditions
what are they going to do i have a
follow-up for you vice president biden
it relates to something
that president trump said he's accusing
you of wanting socialized medicine what
do you say to people who have concerns
that your health care plan which
includes a government insurance option
takes the country
one step closer to a health care system
run entirely by the government
what's your response to that i say it's ridiculous it's like saying
that you know
we're uh the idea that the fact that
there's a public option that people can
choose that makes it a socialist plan look the
difference between the president i think
health care is not a
privilege it's a right everyone should
have the right to have affordable health
care and i am very proud of my plan it's
gotten endorsed by
all the major labor unions as well as as
well as a whole range of other people
who in fact are concerned in the medical
field this is something that's going to save
people's lives and this is going to give
some people an opportunity an opportunity to
have health care for their children
how many of you home are worried and
rolling around in bed tonight wondering
what in god's name you're going to do if
you get sick because you've lost your
home insurance your your health
insurance your company's gone under
we have to provide health insurance for
people at an affordable rate and that's
what i do
president trump excuse me he was there
your response for 47 years he didn't do it
he was now there as vice president for
eight years and it's not like it was 25
years ago it
was three and three quarters it was just
a little while ago right less than four
years ago he didn't do anything
he didn't do it he wants socialized
medicine and it's not that he wants it
his vice president
i mean she is is more liberal
than bernie sanders and wants it even
more bernie sanders wants it
the democrats want it you're going to
have socialized medicine just like you
want it with fracking
we're not going to have fracking we're
going to stop fracking we're going to
stop fracking then he goes to
pennsylvania after he gets a nomination
where he got very lucky to get it
and he goes to pennsylvania and he says
oh we're going to have fracking
and you never ask that question and by
the way so far i respect very much the
way you're handling this i have to say
by the way but somebody should ask the
question you can ask it he goes for a year
there will be no fracking
we do have a number there will be no petroleum we have a number
of topics
we're going to get to no no but that's a big question we're going to get
to a number of topics it's the same thing with socialized
medicine i have to respond to health care vice president your response please my
response is people deserve to have
affordable health care
period period period period and the
biden care proposal will in fact
provide for that affordable health care
lower premiums what we're going to do is
going to cost some money
it's going to cost over $750 billion
over 10 years to do it
and they're going to have lower premiums
you can buy into the better plans
the cheaper plans lower your premiums
deal with
unexpected billing and have your
drug prices drop significantly
he keeps talking about it he hasn't done
a thing for anybody on health care not a
thing kristen when he says very quickly
then i want to talk about what's happening on capitol hill when he says
public option he's talking about
socialized medicine
and health care when he
talks about a public option
he's talking about destroying your
medicare totally destroyed wrong and
destroying your social security
and this whole country will come down
you know bernie sanders tried it
in his state bernie's not the he tried it in his state his
governor was a very liberal governor they want to
make it work okay let's hear it
was impossible to work let's let vice president biden respond it doesn't work vice president
biden's response he's a very confused guy he thinks he's running
against somebody else
he's running against joe biden i beat
all those other people because i
disagreed with them
joe biden he's running against and the
idea that we're in a situation that is
going to destroy medicare
this is the guy that the actuary
at medicare said
if in fact at social security if in fact
he continues to
withhold his plan to withhold the tax on
social security
social security will be bankrupt in by
2023 with no way to make up for it this is
the guy who's tried to cut
medicare so no i don't i mean the idea
that donald trump
is lecturing me on social security and
medicare come on he tried to get rid of 10 seconds mr president and then i have to go to another question he tried
to hurt social security years ago
years ago go back and look at the
records he tried to hurt social security
years ago one thing all right
let's move on but this is the guy i'm going to move on that when
they announced mr president last week i have to
move on to the next question or else they say
the stock market will boom we're not gonna have time to talk about
it if i'm elected if he's elected
the stock market will crash okay let's
move on to the next
question the biggest analysts are saying that may i respond very quickly look the idea that
the stock market is booming is his only
measure of what's happening
where i come from in scranton and
claymont the people don't live off of
the stock market
just in the uh just in the last three
uh three years during this crisis
the billionaires in this
country made according to the
wall street 700 billion more dollars
700 billion more dollars because that's
his only measure
what happens to the ordinary people out
there what happens to them
let's talk about what's happening on capitol hill 401(k)s kristen 401(k)s are through
the roof
we're going to move on people's stock are through the
roof all right and he doesn't come from scranton
that's like one of he lived there for a
short period of time before he even knew
it we're going to move on to the next question and he left
and the people of pennsylvania will show you that let me
move on to my next question
gentlemen they understand as of tonight more than 12 million
people are out of work
and as of tonight 8 million more
americans have fallen into poverty
and more families are going hungry every
day those hit hardest are women
and people of color they see washington
fighting over a relief bill
mr president why haven't you been able
to get them the help they need 30
seconds here because nancy pelosi
doesn't want to approve it i do but
you're the president
i do but i still have to get
unfortunately that's one of the reasons
i think we're going to take over the
house because of her
nancy pelosi doesn't want to approve
anything because she'd love to have some
victories on a date called november 3rd nancy
pelosi does not want to approve it
we are ready willing and able to do
something don't forget we've
already approved three plans and it's
gone through including the democrats in
all fairness
this one she doesn't want it's near the
election because she thinks it helps her
politically i think it hurts her politically all
right mr vice president by the way as you know the
republican leader in
the united states senate said he can't
pass it he will not be able to pass it
he does not have republican votes why
isn't he talking to his republican
friends let me follow up with you vice president
if we made a deal biden because the republicans will pass it
let me ask vice president biden a
question you are the leader of the
democratic party
why have you not pushed the democrats to
get a deal for the american people well
i have and they have pushed it look they
passed this act
all the way back in the beginning of the
summer this is like it's not new
it's been out there this heroes act has
been sitting there
and look at what's happening when i
was in charge of the recovery act with
$800 billion
i was able to get $145 billion to
local communities
that have to balance their budgets and
states that have to balance their budgets
so they didn't
have to fire firefighters
teachers first responders law
enforcement officers
so they could keep their cities and
counties running he will not support
that they have not done a thing for them
and mitch mcconnell said let them go
bankrupt let them go bankrupt
come on what's the matter with these guys the bill that was
passed in the house
was a bailout of badly run high
crime democrat all run by democrat
cities and states
it was a way of getting a lot of money
billions and billions of dollars to
these guys
it was also a way of getting a lot of
money from our people's pockets to
people that come into our country
illegally we were going to take care of
everything for them
and what that does and i'd love to do
that i'd love to help them but what that
does everybody all over the world will start
pouring into our country we can't do it
this was a way of taking care of them
this was a way of spending on things
that had nothing to do with covid as per
your question
but it was really a big bailout for
badly run
democrat cities and states all right i want to by the way if
i get elected i'm not gonna
i'm running as a proud democrat but i'm
gonna be an american president
i don't see red states and blue states
what i see
is american united states and folks
every single state out there finds
themself in trouble they're gonna start laying
off whether they're red or blue
cops firefighters first responders
teachers
because they have to balance their
budget and the founders were smart
they allowed the federal government to
deficit spend to compensate
for the united states of america i want
to talk about the minimum wage gentlemen
mr vice president
we are talking a lot about struggling
small businesses yes
and business owners these days do you
think this is the right time to ask them
to raise the minimum wage you of course
support a $15
federal minimum wage i do because i think one
of the things we're going to have to do
is we're going to have to bail them out
too we should be bailing them
out now those small businesses you got
one in six of them going under
they're not going to be able to make it
back they passed
a package that allows us to be able they
call ppp
money's supposed to go to help them do
everything from organize
how they can deal with their businesses
being open safely
schools how they can make classrooms
smaller how they can hire more teachers
how they can put ventilation systems in
they need the help the businesses as
well as the schools need the help but this
these guys will not help them it's not
giving them any of the money
we are going to move on to immigration
excuse me one thing very quickly but i want to get your reaction he said we have to help our
small businesses
by raising the minimum wage that's not
helping i think it should be a state
option alabama is different than new york new
york is different from vermont
every state is different it should be a
state option you said very recently we have to help
it's very important we have to help our
small businesses you said how are you helping
your small businesses when you're
forcing wages
what's going to happen and what's been
proven to happen is when you do that
these small businesses
fire many of their employees you said
very recently not true by the way you would consider
raising the federal minimum wage to
fifteen dollars an hour say it you said
recently you would consider raising the
federal minimum wage to fifteen dollars
an hour
i what i really like is that still the case and i would
consider it to an extent
in a second administration
but what i really like in a second administration but not to a
level that's going to put all these
businesses out of business
it should be a state option look
i've lived in different places i know
different places they're all different
some places $15 is not so bad
in other places other states $15 would
be ruinous okay president trump thank you
quick response vice president biden no one should work two jobs
one job
be below poverty people are making six
seven eight bucks an hour
these first responders we all clap for
as they come down the street
because they've allowed us to make it
what's happening they deserve
a minimum wage of fifteen dollars
anything below that puts you below the
poverty level
and there is no evidence that when you
raise the minimum wage
businesses go out of business that is
simply not
true we're going to talk about
immigration it's an old saw we're going to talk about
immigration now gentlemen
and we're going to talk about families
within this context mr president your
administration separated children from their parents at
the border at least 4,000
kids you've since reversed your zero
tolerance policy
but the united states can't locate the
parents of more than 500 children
so how will these families ever be
reunited children
are brought here by coyotes and lots of
bad people
cartels and they're brought here and
they used to use them to get into our
country we now have as strong a border as we've
ever had
we're over 400 miles of brand new wall
you see the numbers and we let people in
but they have to come in legally and
they come in through merit but how will
you reunite these kids with their families let me just tell you
they built cages you know they used to
say i built the cages
and then they had a picture in a certain
newspaper and it was a picture of these horrible
cages and they said look at these cages
president trump built them and then it
was determined they were built
in 2014 that was him they built
cages do you have a plan to reunite the kids with their families yes we're working on it very we're
trying very hard but a lot of these kids come
out without the parents they come over
through cartels and through coyotes and
through gangs
vice president biden let me bring you into
this conversation quick response and
then another question to you these 500
plus kids
came with parents they separated them at
the border
to make it a disincentive to come to
begin with
be real tough we're really strong and
guess what
they cannot it's not coyotes didn't
bring them over their
parents were with them they got
separated from their parents
and it makes us a laughingstock and
violates every notion of who we are as a
nation let me ask you a followup question kristen they did
it we changed the policy your response
to that they did
it we changed we did not separate the they built the cages
who built the cages joe let's talk about what we're talking about who
built the cages
joe let's talk about what we're talking
about what happened
parents were ripped their kids were
ripped from their arms
and separated and now they cannot find
over 500
sets of those parents and those kids are
alone nowhere to go nowhere to go it's
criminal it's criminal let me ask you about immigration kristen i
will say this they went down ten seconds and then i need to ask we brought
reporters everything
they are so well taken care of they're
in facilities that were so clean
but some of them haven't been reunited with their families and have gotten such good but
just ask one question
who built the cages i'd love you to ask
him that who built the cages joe
let me ask about your immigration policy
mr vice president the obama
administration did fail to deliver
immigration reform which had been a key
promise during the administration it
also presided over record deportations
as well as family detentions at the
border before changing course
so why should voters trust you with an
immigration overhaul now
because we made a mistake it made too it
took too long to get it right
took too long to get it right i'll be
president of the united states not vice
president of the united states
and the fact is i've made it very clear
within a hundred days i'm going to send to the
united states congress
a pathway to citizenship for over 11
million undocumented people
and all of those so-called dreamers
those daca kids
they're going to be immediately
certified again to be able to stay in
this country
and put on a path to citizenship the
idea that
they are being sent home by this guy and
they want to do that
is they've gone to a country they've
never seen before i can imagine you're
five years old your parents are taking
you across
the the rio grande river and it's
and it's illegal and you say oh no mom
leave me here i'm not going to go with
you they been here many of them are model
citizens over 20,000
of them are first responders out there taking
care of people during this crisis
we owe them we owe them
president trump your reaction kristen he had eight years to do what
he said he was going to do
and i've changed we did without having a
specific we got rid of catch and release we got
rid of a lot of
horrible things that they put in and
that they lived with
but he had eight years he was vice
president he
did nothing except build cages
to keep children in vice president biden your
response the catch and release you know what he's
talking about there if in fact you had
a family came across and they were
arrested they in fact were given a date to show
up for their hearing
they were released and guess what they
showed up for a hearing
and this is the first president in the history
of the united states america that's anybody
seeking asylum has to do it in another
country that's never happened before in america
that's never happened before in america
you come to the united states and you
make your case that i
seek asylum based on the following on
the following premise
why i deserve it under american law
they're sitting in squalor on the other
side of the river
president trump your response so important
thirty seconds and then we'll move on it just shows that he has no
understanding of immigration of the laws
catch and release is a disaster
a murderer would come in a rapist would
come in
a very bad person would come in we would
take their name
we have to release them into our country
and then you say they come back less
than 1% of the people
come back we have to send ice out and
border patrol out to find them
we would say come back in two years
three years
we're going to give you a court case you
need perry mason we're going to give you
a court case
when you say they come back they don't
come back joe they never come back
only the really i hate to say this
but those with the lowest iq they might
come back but there are very very few okay president trump let's
give vice president biden a chance to
respond and then we're going to move on
to the next section you don't know the law
joe vice president biden your response i know
the law what he's telling you is simply
not true
check it out well check it out they don't come back check
it out all right let's move on to the next section but we don't
have to worry about it
because i terminated it so we don't have to worry
about it anymore joe let's move on to the next section that's right and you have
525 kids not knowing where in god's name
they're going to be and lost their
parents go ahead
all right let's talk about our next
section which is
race in america and i want to talk about
the way black and brown americans
experience race in this country
part of that experience is something
called the talk
it happens regardless of class and
income parents who feel they have no choice but
to prepare their children for the chance
that they could be targeted including by
the police for no reason
other than the color of their skin mr
vice president in the next two minutes
i want you to speak directly to these
families do you understand
why these parents fear for their
children i do
i do you know my daughter is a social
worker and uh she's all she's written a lot
about this she's a has a graduate degree
from the university of pennsylvania in
social work
and you know uh one of the reasons why i
ended up working on the east side of
wilmington delaware which is
90% african-american was to learn
more about what was going on what i
didn't i never had to tell my daughter
if she's pulled over make sure she puts
for a
traffic stop put both hands on top of
the wheel and don't reach for the glove
box because someone may shoot you but a
black parent no matter how wealthy or
how poor they are
has to teach their child when you're
walking down the street
don't have a hoodie on when you go
across the street making sure that you
in fact
if you get pulled over just yes sir no
sir hands on top of the wheel because you
are in fact the victim whether you're a
person making
300,000 child of a $300,000 a year
person or someone who's on food stamps
the fact of the matter is there is
institutional racism in america
and we have always said we've never
lived up to it that we hold these truths
to be self-evident all men and women are
created equal well guess what
we have never ever lived up to it but we've
always constantly been moving the needle
further and further to inclusion
not exclusion this is the first
president to come along and says that's
the end of that
we're not going to do that anymore we
have to provide for economic opportunity
better education better health care
better access to
schooling better access to opportunity
to borrow money to start businesses all the
things we can do and i've laid out a
clear plan
as to how to do those things just to
give people a shot
it's about accumulating the ability to
have wealth as well as it is
to be free from violence president trump
same question to you and let me remind
you of the question i would like you to
speak directly to these families do you
understand why these parents fear for their
children yes i do
and again he's been in government 47
years he never did a thing
except in 1994 when he did
such harm to the black community and
they were called and he called them
superpredators
and he said that he said it superpredators
and they have never lived that down 1994
your crime bill the superpredators
nobody has done more for the black
community than donald trump and if you
look with the exception of abraham lincoln
possible exception but the exception of
abraham lincoln nobody has done what i've done
criminal justice reform obama and
joe didn't do it i don't even think they
tried because they had no chance at
doing it
they might've wanted to do it but if
you had to see the arms i had to twist to
get that done
it was not a pretty picture and
everybody knows it including some very
liberal people that
cried in my office they cried in the
oval office two weeks later they're out
saying gee we have to defeat him
criminal justice reform prison reform
opportunity zones with tim scott a great
senator from
south carolina he came in with this
incredible idea for opportunity zones
it's one of the most successful programs
people don't talk about it tremendous
investment is being made biggest
beneficiary the black and hispanic communities and
then historically black
colleges and universities after three
years of coming to the office i love
some of those guys they were great
they came into the office and they said
i said what are you doing after three
years i said why do you keep coming back
because we have no funding i said you
don't have to come back every year we
have to come back
because president obama would never give
them long-term funding
and i did ten year long-term funding
and i gave them more money than they
asked for because i said i think you
need more
and i said the only bad part about this
is i may never see you again because
i got very friendly with them and they
like me and i like them
but i saved historically black colleges
and universities okay
and we're going to talk about both of
your records but your response to that
vice president my response to that is
i never ever said what he
accused me of saying the fact of the
matter is in 2000 though
after the crime bill had been in
the law for awhile
this is a guy who said the problem with
the crime bill there's not enough people
in jail
there's not enough people in jail and go
on my website get the quote the date
when he said it
not enough people he talked about
marauding gangs young gangs and
the people who are going to maraud our
cities this is a guy who in the central
park five
five innocent black kids he continued to
push for making sure
that they got the death penalty none of
them were none of them
were guilty of what the crime of the
crimes that were
suggested look and talk about he
granted he did in fact let 20 people he
commuted 20 people's sentences
we commuted over a thousand people's
sentences over a thousand
the very law he's talking about is a law
that in fact
initiated by barack obama and secondly
we're in a situation here where we the
federal prison system was reduced by
38,000 people
under our administration and one of
those things we should be doing there
should be
no no minimum mandatories
in the law that's why i'm offering $20
billion to states to change
their state laws
to eliminate minimum mandatories and set
up drug courts no one should be going to
jail because they have a drug problem they
should be going to rehabilitation
not to jail we should fundamentally
change the system and that's what i'm
going to do
but why didn't he do it four years ago
why didn't you do that four years ago
even less than that why didn't you when
you were vice president you keep talking
about all these things you're going to
do and you're going to do this
but you were there just a short time ago
and you guys did nothing
we did you know joe i i ran because of
you i ran because of barack obama
because you did a poor job if i thought
you did a good job i would have never
i would have never run i ran because of
you i'm looking at you now you're a
i ran because of you all right vice
president biden your response to that
and then i do have some questions for
both of you well i'll tell you what
i uh i hope he does look at me because
what's happening here is
you know who i am you know who he is you
know his character you know my character
you know our reputations for honor and
telling the truth
i am anxious to have this race i am
anxious to see this
take place i am the character of the
country is on the ballot
our character is on the ballot look at
us closely let me ask some folks
please respond and then we're going to
have something that's true about russia
ukraine china other countries iraq
if this is true then he's a corrupt
politician right so don't give me the
stuff about how you're this innocent
joe they're calling you a corrupt
politician nobody
president trump i want to stay on the
issue of racism we're talking about that
from hell president trump we're talking
about race right now and i do want to
on the issue of race president trump you
have to respond to that please
look very quick there are 50 former
national intelligence folks
who said that what this he's accusing me
of is a russian
plant they have said that this is has
all the cow
four five former heads of the c.i.a both
say what he's saying is a bunch of
garbage nobody believes it except that
his and his good friend rudy gianni you
mean the laptop is
now another russia russia russia hoax
that's exactly what
this is exactly what this is where he's
going the laptop
is russia russia i want to stay on the
issue of race you have to be kidding me
here we go
again with russia we're going to
continue on the issue of race mr
president you've described
the black lives matter movement as a
symbol of hate
you've shared a video of a man chanting
white power to millions of your
you've said that black professional
athletes exercising their first
amendment rights should be fired
what do you say to americans who say
that kind of language from a president
is contributing to a climate of hate and
racial strife well you have to
understand the first time i ever heard
of black lives matter
they were chanting pigs in a blanket
talking about police
pigs pigs talking about our police pigs
in a blanket
fry them like bacon i said that's a
horrible thing and they were marching
down the street
and that was my first uh glimpse of
black lives matter i thought it was a
terrible thing
as far as my relationships with
all people i think i have great
relationships with all people
i am the least racist person in this
what do you say to americans who are
concerned by that rhetoric i don't know
i mean i don't know what to say i got
criminal justice reform done and prison
reform and opportunity zones i took care
of black
colleges and universities i don't know
what to say
they can say anything i mean they can
say anything
it's a very it makes me sad because i am
i am the least racist person i can't
even see the audience because it's so
but i don't care who's in the audience
i'm the least racist person in this room
okay vice president biden let me ask you
very quickly and then i have a follow-up
question for you
abraham lincoln here is one of the most
racist presidents we've had in modern
he pours fuel on every single
racist fire every single one he started
off his campaign coming down the
escalator saying he's getting rid of
mexican rapists he's banned muslims
because they're muslims
he has moved around and made everything
across the board he says to the about
the poor boys
last time we were on stage here he said
i told him to stand down
and stand ready come on this guy is a
dog whistle about as big as a foghorn
president trump i'm going to give you 10
seconds to respond and then i have a
he made a reference to abraham lincoln
where did that come in i mean you said
abraham line where did that no no you
said i said not
since abraham lincoln has anybody done
what i've done for the black community
and i'm going to say i'm abraham lincoln
i said
not since abraham lincoln has anybody
done what i've done for the black
community now you have done nothing
other than the crime bill
which put oh god now tens of thousands
of black men mostly in jail all right
you know what let me remember you look
at what's happening with the voting
right now
let me ask they remember that very very
just take a look at what's happening out
there vice president biden let me give
you a chance to respond within this
context crime bills that you supported
in the 80s and 90s
contributed to the incarceration of tens
of thousands of young black men
who had small amounts of drugs in their
possession they are sons they are
brothers their fathers their uncles
whose families are still to this day
some of them suffering the consequences
so speak to those families why should
they vote for you one of the things is
that in the 80s we passed
100 percent all 100 senators voted for
a bill on drugs and how to deal with
drugs it was a mistake
i've been trying to change the since
then particularly the portion on cocaine
that's why i've been arguing that in
fact we should not
send anyone to jail for a
pure drug offense they should be going
into treatment
across the board that's what we should
be spending money that's why i set up
drug courts which were never funded
by republican friends they should not be
going to jail
for a drug or an alcohol problem they
should be going
into treatment treatment that's what
we've been trying to do that's what i'm
going to get done
because i think the american people have
now seen
that in fact it was a mistake to pass
those laws related to the drug
but they were not in the crime bill but
why didn't he get it done
see it's all talk no action with his
why didn't he get it done that's what
i'm gonna do when i become president
you were vice president along with obama
as your president your leader
for eight years why didn't you get it
done you had eight years to get it done
now you're saying you're going to get it
done because you're all talk and no
we got a lot of it done we released 38
did anything got 38 000
prisoners left you got nothing done 38
000 prisoners were released from federal
we have there were over a thousand
people who were given clemency
we make fact we're the ones that put in
the legislation saying
we could look at pattern and practice of
police departments and what they were
how they were conducting themselves i
could go on but we began the process
we began the process we lost an election
that's why i'm running
to win back that election and change his
terrible policies
why didn't you do it in the eight years
a short time ago why didn't you do it
you just said
i'm going to do that i'm going to do
this you put tens
of thousands of mostly black young men
in prison now you're saying you're going
to get you're going to undo that
why didn't you get it done you had eight
years with obama you know why joe
because you're all talk
and no action all right vice president
biden and then we're going to move on to
the next section
we had a republican congress
that's the answer okay you got to talk
them into it you know so all right
you got to talk them into it we're going
to move on to our next section like i
did with
criminal justice reform i had to talk
democrats into it gentlemen you're dead
we're running out of time so we got to
get on to climate change please
you both have very different visions on
climate change
president trump you say that
environmental regulations have hurt jobs
in the energy sector
vice president biden you have said you
see addressing climate change
as an opportunity to create new jobs for
each of you
how would you both combat climate change
and support job growth
at the same time starting with you
president trump you have two minutes
so we have the trillion trees program
we have so many different programs i do
love the environment but what i want is
the cleanest crystal clear water
the cleanest air we have the best lowest
number in
carbon emissions which is a big standard
that i notice
obama goes with all the time not joe i
haven't heard joe use the term because
i'm not sure he knows what it represents
or means but i have heard obama use it
and we have the best carbon emission
numbers that we've had in 35 years
under this administration we are working
so well with industry but
here's what we can't do look at china
how filthy it is
look at russia look at india it's
filthy the the air is filthy
the paris accord i took us out because
we were going to have to spend
trillions of dollars and we were treated
very unfairly
when they put us in there they did us a
great disservice they were going to take
away our businesses
i will not sacrifice tens of millions of
thousands and thousands of companies
because of
the paris accord it was so unfair china
doesn't kick in
until 2030 russia goes back to a low
and we kicked in right away it would
have been
it would have been it would have
destroyed our businesses so
you ready we have done an incredible job
we have the cleanest air the cleanest
water and the best carbon emission
that we've seen in many many years vice
president we haven't destroyed our
vice president biden two minutes to you
climate change and climate warming
global warming is an existential threat
to humanity
we have a moral obligation to deal with
and we're told by all the leading
scientists in the world we don't have
much time we're gonna pass the point of
no return
within the next eight to ten years four
more years of this man
eliminating all the regulations that
were put in by us
to clean up the climate to clean up to
the the limited emissions will put us in
a position where we're going to be in
trouble here's where we have a great
opportunity i was able to get
both all the environmental organizations
as well as labor
the people worried about jobs to support
climate plan because what it does it
will create
millions of new good paying jobs we're
going to invest
in for example five hundred thousand
fifty thousand fifty thousand charging
on our highways so that we can own the
electric car market of the future
in the meantime china is doing that
we're going to be in a position where
we're going to see to it
that we're going to take 4 million
existing billion
buildings and 2 million existing homes
and retrofit them so they don't leak as
much energy
saving hundreds of millions of barrels
of oil in the process
and creating significant number of jobs
and by the way
the whole idea of what this is all going
to do it's going to create
millions of jobs and it's going to clean
the environment our health
and our jobs are at stake that's what's
and what right now by the way wall
street firms indicated that
my plan my my plan will in fact create
18.6 million jobs 7 million more than
his this is from wall street
and i'll create one trillion dollars
more in economic growth
than his proposal does not on climate
just on the economy
president trump they came out and said
very strongly
six thousand five hundred dollars will
be taken away from families under his
that his plan is an economic disaster if
you look at what he wants to do you know
if you look at his plan his
environmental plan you know who
developed it
aoc plus three they know nothing
about the climate i mean she's got a
good line of stuff but she knows nothing
about the climate
and they're all hopping through hoops
for aoc plus three
look their real plan costs hundred
trillion dollars
if we had the best year in the history
of our country for a hundred years
we would not even come close to a number
like that
when he says buildings they want to take
buildings down because i want to make
bigger windows into smaller windows
as far as they're concerned if you had
no window it would be a lovely thing
this is the craziest plan that anybody
has ever seen
and this wasn't done by smart people
this wasn't done by
anybody frankly i don't even know how it
can be good politically
they want to spend a hundred trillion
dollars that's their real number he's
trying to say it was six
it's a hundred trillion dollars they
want to knock down buildings and build
new buildings with little
tiny small windows i mean and many other
things okay and many other things let me
have the vice president respond and
we're running out of time and we have a
lot more questions
so let's hear from the vice president i
have a number of more questions i don't
know where he comes from
i don't know where he comes up with
these numbers wins 100
trillion dollars give me a break
this plan was this is planned endorsed
by every major
every major environmental group and
every labor group
labor because they know the future lies
the future lies and thus being able to
breathe and they know they're good jobs
in getting us there
and by the way the fastest growing
industry in america
are is is is the electric
the excuse me solar energy and wind
he thinks wind causes cancer windmills
it's the fastest growing
jobs and they pay good prevailing wages
45-50 bucks an hour
we can grow and we can be cleaner
if we go the route i'm proposing
president trump just me
please respond and then i have to we are
energy independent for the first time
we don't need all of these countries
that we had to fight war over because we
needed their energy
we are energy independent i know more
about wind than you do
it's extremely expensive kills all the
it's very intermittent it's got a lot of
problems and they happen to make the
windmills in both germany and china
and the fumes coming up if you're a
believer in carbon emission
the fumes coming up to make make these
massive windmills
is more than anything that we're talking
about with natural gas which is very
clean one other thing
find me a solar system i love solar but
solar doesn't quite have it yet
it's not powerful yet to to really run
our big
beautiful factories that we need to
compete with the world
so far it's all a pipe dream but you
know what we'll do
we're going to have the greatest economy
in the world but if you want to kill the
get rid of your oil industry you want
and and what about fracking all right
now let me know let me let me allow vice
to respond never said i oppose frackie
you said it on tape i did show the tape
put it on your website i'll put it on
put it on the website
the fact of the matter is flat lying
would you rule out banning fracking
i do rule out banning fracking because
the answer we need
we need other industries
to transition to get to ultimately a
zero emissions by 2025 what i will do
with fracking over time
is make sure that we can capture the
from the fracking capture the emissions
from gas
we can do that and we can do that by
investing money and doing it but
it's a transition to that i have one
more question in this position
he was against fracking he said it i
will show that to you tomorrow
i am against fracking until he got the
nomination went to pennsylvania then he
but you know what pennsylvania he'll be
against it very soon because his party
is totally against fracking on federal
land i said no
fracking use no oil let me ask this
final question
in this section and then i want to move
on to our final section
president trump people of color are much
more likely to live near oil refineries
and chemical plants
in texas there are families who worry
the plants near them are making them
your administration has rolled back
regulations on these kinds of facilities
why should these families give you
another four years in office
the families that we're talking about
are employed heavily
and they're making a lot of money more
money than they've ever made
if you look at the kind of numbers that
we produce for hispanic
or black for asian it's nine times
greater the percentage gain
than it was under in three years that it
was under
eight years of the two of them
to put it nicely nine times more
now somebody lives i have not heard the
numbers or the state
statistics that you're saying but
they're making a tremendous amount of
economically we saved it and i saved it
again a number of months ago when oil
was crashing because of the pandemic
we saved it we got say what you want
about relationship
we got saudi arabia mexico and russia
to cut back way back we saved our oil
and now it's very vibrant together and
everybody has very inexpensive gasoline
vice president biden your response and
then we're going to have a final
question for both of you my response
is that those people live on what they
call fence lines he doesn't understand
they live near chemical plants that in
fact pollute
chemical plants and oil plants and
refineries that pollute
i used to live near that when i was
growing up in claim clemont delaware
and all the more oral refineries in
marcus hook in the delaware river than
there is
any place including in houston at the
time when my mom get in the car
and when it when her first frost to
drive me to school turn in the
windshield but there'd be oil slick in
the window
that's why so many people in my state
were dying and getting cancer
the fact is those front line communities
it doesn't matter what you're paying
them it matters
how you keep them safe what do you do
and you impose restrictions on the
that the pollutants coming out of those
fence line
communities okay i have one final would
he close down the ireland
it falls or would you close down the
earth by the way i have a transition
from the oil industry yes
oh transition it is a big statement
i would stop why would you do that
because the oil industry pollutes
significantly i said here's the deal but
that's a big step
well if you let me finish the statement
because it has to be replaced by
renewable energy
over time over time and i'd stop giving
to the oil industry i'd stop giving them
federal subsidies
he won't give federal subsidies to the
to the gas
excuse me to the uh to solar and wind
yeah why are we giving it to oil
industry we actually do give it to solar
and wind
that's maybe the biggest statement in
terms of business that's the biggest
thing okay
because basically what he's saying is he
is going to destroy
the oil industry will you remember that
texas would you
remember that pennsylvania oklahoma vice
president biden let me give you ten
seconds to respond and then i have to
get to the final question vice president
he takes everything out of context but
the point is look
we have to move toward a net zero
the first place to do that by the year
2035 is in energy production
by 2050 totally all right is he going to
get china to do it no we're finished
with is he going to get china's
final question i'm going to rejoin paris
accord and make china abide by what they
agreed to
all right leadership gentlemen and this
first question does go to you president
imagine this is your inauguration day
what will you say
in your address to america to americans
who did not vote for you
you'll each have one minute starting
with you we have to make
a country totally successful as it was
prior to the plague coming in from china
now we're rebuilding it and we're doing
record numbers 11.4 million jobs in a
short period of time etc but i will tell
you go back
before the plague came in just before i
was getting calls
from people that were not normally
people that would call me
they wanted to get together we had the
best black
unemployment numbers in the history of
our country hispanic
women asian people with diplomas with no
diplomas mit
graduates number one in the class
everybody had the best numbers
and you know what the other side wanted
to get together they wanted to unify
success is going to bring us together we
are on the road to success
but i'm cutting taxes and he wants to
raise everybody's taxes and he wants to
put new regulations on everything
he will kill it if he gets in you will
have a depression the likes of which
you've never seen
your 401ks will go to hell and it'll be
a very very sad day for this country
all right vice president biden same
question to you what will you say
during your inaugural address to
americans who did not vote for you
i will say i'm an american president
i represent all of you whether you voted
for me or against me
and i'm going to make sure that you're
represented i'm going to give you hope
we're going to move we're going to
choose science over fiction
we're going to choose hope over fear
we're going to choose to move forward
because we have enormous opportunities
enormous opportunities to make things
better we can grow this economy
we can deal with systemic racism at the
same time
we can make sure that our economy is
run and moved and motivated by clean
energy creating millions of new jobs
and that's the fact that's what we're
going to do and i'm going to say
as i said in the beginning what is on
the ballot here
is the character of this country decency
honor respect treating people with
making sure that everyone has an even
chance and i'm going to make sure you
get that
you haven't been getting in the last
four years all right i want to thank you
both for a very robust
hour and a half a fantastic debate
really appreciate it president trump
former vice president joe biden thank
you to belmont university for hosting us
and most importantly thank you to those
watching tonight
election day is november 3rd don't
forget to vote
thank you everyone and have a great